CHAPTER XXI.
Let me put down with exactness all that happened, as well as I can remember,
since last I made an entry. Not a detail that I can recall must be forgotten,
in whole calmness I must proceed. When I came to Renfield's room I found him lying on the floor,
on his left side, in a glittering pool of blood. When I went to move him it became at once apparent
that he had received some terrible injuries. There seemed none of the unity of purpose between the
which marks even lethargic sanity. As the face was exposed I could see that it was horribly bruised,
as though it had been beaten against the floor. Indeed, it was from the face wounds that the pool
of blood originated. The attendant who was kneeling beside the body said to me as we turned him over,
I think, sir, his back is broken. See, both his right arm and leg and the whole side of his face
are paralyzed. How such a thing could have happened puzzled the attendant beyond measure.
He seemed quite bewildered and his brows were gathered in as he said,
I can't understand the two things. He could mark his face like that by beating his own head on the
floor. I saw a young woman do it once at the Eversfield Asylum before anyone could lay hands
on her. And I suppose he might have broken his neck by falling out of bed if he got in an awkward
kink. But for the life of me I can't imagine how the two things occurred. If his back was broke
he couldn't beat his head. And if his face was like that before the fall out of bed there would
be marks on it. I said to him, go to Dr. Van Helsing and ask him to kindly come here at once.
I want him without an instant's delay. The man ran off and within a few minutes the
professor in his dressing gown and slippers appeared. When he saw Renfield on the ground
he looked keenly at him a moment then turned to me. I think he recognized my thought in my eyes
for he said very quietly manifestly for the ears of the attendant. Ah, a sad accident.
He will need very careful watching and much attention. I shall stay with you myself,
but I shall first dress myself. If you will remain I shall in a few minutes join you.
The patient was now breathing stertoriously and it was easy to see that he had suffered some
terrible injury. Van Helsing returned with extraordinary celerity bearing with him a
surgical case. He had evidently been thinking and had his mind made up for almost before he looked
the patient he whispered to me, send the attendant away. We must be alone with him when he becomes
conscious after the operation. I said, I think that will do now Simmons. We have done all that
we can at present. You had better go your round and Dr. Van Helsing will operate. Let me know
instantly if there be anything unusual anywhere. The man withdrew and we went into a strict
examination of the patient. The wounds of the face were superficial. The real injury was at
the pressed fracture of the skull extending right up through the motor area. The professor thought a
moment and said, we must reduce the pressure and get back to normal conditions as far as can be.
The rapidity of the suffusion shows the terrible nature of his injury. The whole motor area seems
affected. The suffusion of the brain will increase quickly so he must cleft in at once or it may be
tapping at the door. I went over and opened it and found in the corridor without Arthur and
Quincy in pajamas and slippers. The former spoke, I heard your man call up Dr. Van Helsing and tell
him of an accident. So I woke Quincy or rather called for him as he was not asleep. Things are
moving too quickly and too strangely for sound sleep for any of us these times. I've been thinking
that tomorrow night we'll not see things as they have been. We'll have to look back and forward a
little more than we have done. May we come in? I nodded and held the door open till they had entered
then I closed it again. When Quincy saw the attitude and state of the patient and noted the
horrible pool on the floor he said softly, my God, what has happened to him? Poor, poor devil.
I told him briefly and added that we expected he would recover consciousness after the operation
for a short time at all events. He went at once and sat down on the edge of the bed with
a dollaming beside him. We all watched in patience. We shall wait, said Van Helsing,
just long enough to fix the best spot for roughening so that we may most quickly and
perfectly remove the blood clot for it is evident that the hemorrhage is increasing.
The minutes during which we waited passed with fearful slowness. I had a horrible sinking in my
heart and from Van Helsing's face I gathered that he felt some fear or apprehension as to what was
to come. I dreaded the words Renfield might speak. I was positively afraid to think.
But the conviction of what was coming was on me as I have read of men who have heard the death watch.
The poor man's breathing came in uncertain gasps. Each instant he seemed as though he would open
his eyes and speak but then would follow a prolonged stertorous breath and he would relapse
into a more fixed insensibility. Inured as I was to sickbeds and death the suspense grew and grew
upon me. I could almost hear the beating of my own heart and the blood surging through my
temple sounded like blows from a hammer. Silence finally became agonizing. I looked at my companions
one after another and saw from their flushed faces and damp brows that they were enduring equal
torture. There was a nervous suspense over us all as though overhead some dread bell would
peel out powerfully when we should least expect it. At last there came a time when it was evident
the patient was sinking fast. He might die at any moment. I looked up at the professor and
caught his eyes fixed on mine. His face was sternly sad as he spoke. That is no time to lose.
His words may be worth many lives. I have been thinking so as I stood here.
It may be there is a soul at stake. We shall operate just above the ear.
Without another word he made the operation. For a few moments the breathing continued to be
then there came a breath so prolonged that it seemed as though it would tear open his chest.
Suddenly his eyes opened and became fixed in a wild helpless stare. This was continued for a
few moments then it was softened into a glad surprise and from his lips came a sigh of relief.
He moved convulsively and as he did so said I'll be quiet doctor tell them to take off the straight
waistcoat. I have had a terrible dream and it has left me so weak that I cannot move.
What's wrong with my face? It feels all swollen and it smarts dreadfully.
He tried to turn his head but even with the effort his eyes seemed to grow glassy again so
I gently put it back. Then Van Helsing said in a quiet gray voice. Tell us your dream Mr. Renfield.
As he heard the voice his face brightened through its mutilation and he said.
That is Dr. Van Helsing. How good it is of you to be here. Give me some water. My lips are dry
and I shall try to tell you. I dreamed. He stopped and seemed fainting. I called quietly to Quincy.
The brandy. It is in my study. Quick. He flew and returned to the glass. The decanter of brandy
and a carafe of water. We moistened the parts lips and the patient quickly revived. It seemed
however that his poor injured brain had been working in the interval for when he was quite
conscious he looked at me piercingly with an agonized confusion which I shall never forget
and said I must not deceive myself it was no dream but all a grim reality
then his eyes roved around the room as they caught sight of the two figures sitting patiently on the
edge of the bed he went on if I were not sure already I would know from them for an instant
his eyes closed not with pain or sleep but voluntarily as though he were bringing all his
faculties to bear when he opened them he said hurriedly and with more energy than he had yet
displayed quick doctor quick I am dying I feel that I have but a few minutes and then I must go
back to death or worse wet my lips with brandy again I have something that I must say before I
die or before my crushed brain dies anyhow thank you it was that night after you left me when I
implored you to let me go away I couldn't speak then for I felt my tongue was tied but I was as
despair for a long time after you left me it seemed hours then there came a sudden peace to
me my brain seemed to become cool again and I realized where I was I heard the dogs bark
behind our house but not where he was as he spoke Van Helsing's eyes never blinked but his hand came
out and met mine and gripped it hard he did not however betray himself he nodded slightly and said
gone in a low voice
Renfield proceeded he came up to the window in the mist as I had seen him often before but he
was solid then not a ghost and his eyes were fierce like a man's when angry he was laughing
with his red mouth the sharp white teeth glinted in the moonlight when he turned to look back over
the belt of trees to where the dogs were barking I wouldn't ask him to come in at first though I knew
he wanted to just as he had wanted all along then he began promising me things not in words but by
doing them he was interrupted by a word from the professor how by making them happen just as he
used to send in the flies when the sun was shining great big fat ones with steel and sapphire on their
wings and big moths in the night with skull and crossbones on their backs Van Helsing nodded to
him and he whispered to me unconsciously the acarantia atropos of the sphinges what you call
the death's head moth the patient went on without stopping then he began to whisper rats rats rats
hundreds thousands millions of them and everyone in life and dogs to eat them and cats too all
lives all red blood with years of life in it and not merely buzzing flies I laughed at him for I
wanted to see what he could do then the dogs howled away beyond the dark trees in his house
he beckoned me to the window I got up and looked out and he raised his hands and seemed to call out
without using any words a dark mass spread over the grass coming on like the shape of a flame of
fire and then he moved the mist to the right and left and I could see that there were thousands of
rats with their eyes blazing red like his only smaller he held up his hand and they all stopped
and I thought he seemed to be saying all these lies will I give you I am many more and greater
through countless ages if you will fall down and worship me and then a red cloud like the color of
blood seemed to close over my eyes and before I knew what I was doing I found myself opening
the sash and saying to him come in lord and master the rats were all gone but he slid into the room
through the sash though it was only open an inch wide just as the moon herself has often come in
the tiniest crack and it stood before me in all her size and splendor his voice was weaker so I
moistened his lips with the brandy again and he continued but it seemed as though his memory had
gone on working in the interval for his story was further advanced I was about to call him back to
the point but Van Helsing whispered to me let him go on do not interrupt him he could not go back
and maybe he could not proceed at all if once he lost the thread of his thought
he proceeded all day I waited to hear from him but he did not send me anything not even a blow
fly and when the moon got up I was pretty angry with him when he did slide into the window though
it was shut and did not even knock I got mad with him he sneered at me and his white face looked out
of the mist with his red eyes gleaming and he went on as though he owned the whole place and I was
he didn't even smell the same as he went by me I couldn't hold him
I thought that somehow Mrs. Harker had come into the room the two men sitting on the bed stood up
and came over standing behind him so that he could not see them but where they could hear better
they were both silent but the professor started and quivered his face however grew grimmer and
sterner still Renfield went on without noticing when Mrs. Harker came in to see me this afternoon
she wasn't the same it was like tea after the teapot has been watered here we all moved but
no one said a word he went on I didn't know that she was here till she spoke and she didn't look
the same I don't care for the pale people I like them with lots of blood in them and hers all seem
to have run out I didn't think of it at the time but when she went away I began to think and it
made me mad to know that he had been taking the life out of her I could feel that the rest quivered
as I did but we remained otherwise still so when he came tonight I was ready for him I saw the mist
stealing in and I grabbed it tight I had heard that madmen have unnatural strength and as I knew
I was a madman at times anyhow I resolved to use my power and he felt it too for he had to come out
of the mist to struggle with me I held tight and I thought I was going to win for I didn't mean him
to take any more of her life till I saw his eyes they burned into me and my strength became like
water he slipped through it and when I tried to cling to him he raised me up and flung me down
there was a red cloud before me and a noise like thunder and the mist seemed to steal away under
the door his voice was becoming fainter and his breath more stertorous Van Helsing stood up
instinctively we know the worst now he said he is here and we know his purpose it may not be too late
let us be armed the same as we were the other night but lose no time there is not an instant to spare
there was no need to put our fear nay our conviction into words we shared them in common
we all hurried and took from our rooms the same things that we had when we entered the count's
house the professor had his ready and as we met in the corridor he pointed to them significantly
as he said they never leave me and they shall not till this unhappy business is over be wise also
my friends it is no common enemy that we deal with alas alas that the amino should suffer
he stopped his voice was breaking and i do not know if rage or terror predominated in my own heart
outside the harker's door we paused artin quincy held back and the latter said
should we disturb her we must said van helsing grimly if the door be locked i shall break it in
may it not frighten her terribly it is unusual to break in to a lady's room
van helsing said solemnly you are always right but this is life and death all chambers are
like to the doctor and even were they not they are all as one to me tonight fringe on when i
turn the handle if the door does not open do you put your shoulder down and shove and you flew my
friends now he turned the handle as he spoke but the door did not yield we threw ourselves against
it with a crash it burst open and we almost fell headlong into the room the professor did actually
fall and i saw across him as he gathered himself up from hands and knees what i saw appalled me i
felt my hair rise like bristles on the back of my neck my heart seemed to stand still the moonlight
was so bright that through the thick yellow blind the room was light enough to see on the bed beside
the window lay jonathan harker his face flushed and breathing heavily as though in a stupor
kneeling on the near edge of the bed facing outwards was the white clad figure of his wife
by her stood a tall thin man clad in black his face was turned from us but the instant we saw
we all recognized the count in every way even to the scar on his forehead with his left hand
he held both mrs harker's hands keeping them away with her arms at full tension his right
hand gripped her by the back of the neck forcing her face down on his bosom her white night dress
was smeared with blood and a thin stream trickled down the man's bare chest which was shown by his
open dress the attitude of the two had a terrible resemblance to a child forcing a kitten's nose
into a saucer of milk to compel it to drink as we burst into the room the count turned his face
and the hellish look that i had heard described seemed to leap into it his eyes flamed red with
devilish passion the great nostrils of the white aquiline nose opened wide and quivered at the edge
and the white sharp teeth behind the full lips of the blood dripping mouth clamped together like
those of a wild beast with a wrench which threw his victim back upon the bed as though hurled from
a height he turned and sprang at us but by this time the professor had gained his feet and was
holding toward him the envelope which contained the sacred wafer the count suddenly stopped just
as poor lucy had done outside the tomb and cowered back further and further back he cowered as we
lifting our crucifixes advanced the moonlight suddenly failed as a great black cloud sailed
across the sky and when the gaslight sprang up under quincy's match we saw nothing but a faint
vapor this as we looked trailed under the door which with the recoil from its bursting open had
swung back to its old position van helsing art and i moved forward to mrs harker who by this time had
drawn her breath and with it had given a scream so wild so ear piercing so despairing that it seems
to me now that it will ring in my ears till my dying day for a few seconds she lay in her helpless
attitude and disarray her face was ghastly with a pallor which was accentuated by the blood which
smeared her lips and cheeks and chin from her throat trickled a thin stream of blood her eyes
were mad with terror then she put before her face her poor crushed hands which bore on their
whiteness the red mark of the count's terrible grip and from behind them came a low desolate
whale which made the terrible scream seem only the quick expression of an endless grief
van helsing stepped forward and drew the coverlet gently over her body
whilst art after looking at her face for an instant despairingly ran out of the room
van helsing whispered to me jonathan is in a stupa such as we know the vampire can produce
we can do nothing with poor madam mina for a few moments till she recovers herself i must wake him
he dipped the end of a towel in cold water and with it began to flick him on the face his wife
all the while holding her face between her hands and sobbing in a way that was heartbreaking to
hear i raised the blind and looked out of the window there was much moonshine and as i looked
i could see quincy morris run across the lawn and hide himself in the shadow of a great yew tree
it puzzled me to think why he was doing this but at the instant i heard harcourt's quick
exclamation as he woke to partial consciousness and turned to the bed on his face as there might
was a look of wild amazement he seemed dazed for a few seconds and then full consciousness seemed
to burst upon him all at once and he started up his wife was aroused by the quick movement
and turned to him with her arms stretched out as though to embrace him instantly however she drew
them in again and putting her elbows together held her hands before her face and shuddered
till the bed beneath her shook in god's name what does this mean harker cried out dr seward dr van
helsing what is it what has happened what is wrong mean it dear what is it and what does that
blood mean my god my god has it come to this and raising himself to his knees he beat his hands
wildly together good god help us help her oh help her with a quick movement he jumped from the bed
and began to pull on his clothes all the man in him awake at the need for instant exertion
what has happened tell me all about it he cried without pausing
dr van helsing you love mina i know oh do something to save her it cannot have gone too far yet
guard her while i look for him his wife through her terror and horror and distress saw some sure
danger to him instantly forgetting her own grief she sees hold of him and cried out no no jonathan
you must not leave me i have suffered enough tonight god knows without the dread of his harming
you must stay with me stay with these friends who will watch over you her expression became
frantic as she spoke and he yielding to her she pulled him down sitting on the bedside
and clung to him fiercely van helsing and i tried to calm them both the professor held up his golden
crucifix and said with wonderful calmness do not fear my dear we are here and whilst this is close
to you no foul thing can approach you are safe for tonight and we must be calm and take counsel together
she shuddered and was silent holding down her head on her husband's breast when she raised it
his white night robe was stained with blood where her lips had touched and where the thin open wound
in the neck had sent forth drops the instant she saw it she drew back with a low wail and whispered
amid the choking sobs unclean unclean i must touch him or kiss him no more but that it should be that
it is i who am now his worst enemy and whom he may have most caused to fear to this he spoke out
nonsense it is a shame to me to hear such a word i would not hear it of you and i shall not hear
it from you may god judge me by my desserts and punish me with more bitter suffering than even
this hour if by any act or will of mine anything ever come between us he put out his arms and
folded her to his breast and for a while she lay there sobbing he looked at us over her bowed head
eyes that blinked amply above his quivering nostrils his mouth was set as steel
after a while her sods became less frequent and more faint and then he said to me speaking with
a steady calmness which i felt tried his nervous power to the utmost and now dr seward tell me all
about it too well i know the broad fact tell me all that has been i told him exactly what had
happened and he listened with seeming impassiveness but his nostrils twitched and his eyes blazed as
i told how the ruthless hands of the count had held his wife in that terrible and horrid position
with her mouth to the open wound in his breast it interested me even at that moment to see that
whilst the face of white set passion worked convulsively over the bowed head the hands
tenderly and lovingly stroked the ruffled hair just as i had finished quincy and godalming knocked
at the door they entered in obedience to our summons van helsing looked at me questioningly
i understood him to mean if we were to take advantage of their coming to divert if possible
the thought to the unhappy husband and wife from each other and from themselves so on nodding
acquiescence to him he asked them what they had seen or done to which lord godalming answered
i could not see him anywhere in the passage or in any of our rooms i looked in the study but though
he had been there he had gone he had however he stopped suddenly looking at the poor drooping
figure on the bed van helsing said gravely go on friend arthur we want him no more concealments
our hope now is in knowing all tell freely so art went on he had been there and though it could only
have been for a few seconds he had made rare hay of the place all the manuscript had been burned
and the blue flames were flickering among the white ashes the cylinders your phonograph too were
thrown on the fire and the wax had helped the flames here i interrupted thank god there is
another copy in the safe his face lit for a moment but fell again as he went on i ran downstairs and
but could see no sign of him i looked into windfield's room but there was no trace except
again he paused go on said harker hoarsely so he bowed his head and moistening his lips with his
tongue added except that the poor fellow is dead mrs harker raised her head looking for one to the
of us she said solemnly god's will be done i could not feel that art was keeping back something
but as i took it that it was with a purpose i said nothing van helsing turned to morris and asked
have you any to tell a little he answered it may be much eventually but at present i can't say
i thought it well to know if possible where the count would go when he left the house
i did not see him but i saw a bat rise from renfield's window and flap westward
i expected to see him in some shape go back to carfax but he evidently sought some other lair
he will not be back tonight for the sky is reddening in the east and the dawn is close
we must work tomorrow said the latter words through his shut teeth for a space of perhaps
a couple of minutes they were silent and i could fancy that i could hear the sound of our hearts
beating then van helsing said placing his hand tenderly on mrs harker's head
and now madam mina poor dear dead madam mina tell us exactly what happened god knows that
i do not want that you be pained but it is need that we know all for now more than ever has all
work to be done quick and sharp and in deadly earnest the day is close to us that must end all
if it may be so and now is the chance that we may live and learn the poor dear lady shivered
i could see the tension of her nerves as she clasped her husband closer to her and bent her
head lower and lower still on his breast then she raised her head proudly and held out one hand to
van helsing who took it in his and after stooping and kissing it reverently held it fast the other
hand was locked in that of her husband who held his other arm thrown around her protectingly
after a pause in which she was evidently ordering her thoughts she began
I took the sleeping draught which you had so kindly given me but for a long time it did not
act i seemed to become more wakeful and myriads of horrible fancies began to crowd in upon my
mind all of them connected with death and vampires with blood and pain and trouble her husband
involuntarily groaned and as she turned to him and said lovingly do not fret dear you must be
brave and strong and help me through this horrible task if you only knew what an effort it is to me
tell of this fearful thing at all you would understand how much i need your help well i
saw i must try to help the medicine to do its work with my will if it was to do me any good
so i resolutely set myself to sleep sure enough sleep must soon have come to me for i remember
no more jonathan coming in had not waked me for he lay by my side when next i remember there was
in the room the same thin white mist that i had before noticed but i forget now if you know of
you will find it in my diary which i shall show you later i felt the same vague terror which had
come to me before and the same sense of some presence i turned to wake jonathan but found
that he slept so soundly that it seemed as if it was he who had taken the sleeping draught and not
i i tried but i could not wake him this caused me a great fear and i looked around terrified
then indeed my heart sank within me beside the bed as if he had stepped out of the mist
or rather as if the midst had turned into his figure for it had entirely disappeared
stood a tall thin man all in black i knew him at once from the description of the others
the waxen face the high aquiline nose on which the light fell in a thin white line
the parted red lips with the sharp white teeth showing between and the red eyes that i had
seemed to see in the sunset on the windows of saint mary's church of whitby i knew too the
heart stood still and i would have screamed out only that i was paralyzed in the pause he spoke
in a sort of keen cutting whisper pointing as he spoke to jonathan silence if you make a sound i
shall take him and dash his brains out before your very eyes i was appalled and was too bewildered
to do or say anything with a mocking smile he placed one hand upon my shoulder and holding
me tight bared my throat with the other saying as he did so first a little refreshment to reward
my excessions you may as well be quiet it is not the first time or the second that your veins have
appeased my thirst i was bewildered and strangely enough i did not want to hinder him i suppose it
is a part of the horrible curse that such is when his touch is on his victim and oh my god my god
pity me he placed his reeking lips upon my throat her husband groaned again she clasped his hand
and looked at him pityingly as if he were the injured one and went on i felt my strength fading
away and i was in a half swoon how long this horrible thing lasted i know not but it seemed
that a long time must have passed before he took his foul awful sneering mouth away i saw it drip
with a fresh blood the remembrance seemed for a while to overpower her and she drooped and would
have sunk down but for her husband's sustaining arm with a great effort she recovered herself and
on then he spoke to me mockingly and so you like the others would play your brains against mine
you would help these men to hunt me and frustrate me in my design you know now and they know in part
already and will know in full before long what it is to cross my path they should have kept their
energies for use closer to home whilst they played wits against me against me who commanded nations
and intrigued for them and fought for them hundreds of years before they were born i was
countermining them and you their best beloved one are now to me flesh of my flesh blood of my blood
kin of my kin my bountiful wine press for a while and shall be later on my companion and my helper
you shall be avenged in turn for not one of them but shall minister to your needs but as yet you
are to be punished for what you have done you have aided in thwarting me now you shall come to my call
where my brain says come to you you shall cross land or sea to do my bidding and to that end this
with that he pulled open his shirt and with his long sharp nails opened a vein in his breast
when the blood began to spread out he took my hands in one of his holding them tight and with
the other seized my neck and pressed my mouth to the wound so that i must either suffocate or swallow
some to the oh my god my god what have i done what have i done to deserve such a fate i who have
tried to walk in meekness and righteousness all my days god pity me look down on a poor soul in worse
and mortal peril and in mercy pity those to whom she is dear then she began to rub her lips as
though to cleanse them from pollution as she was telling her terrible story the eastern sky began
to quicken and everything became more and more clear harker was still and quiet but over his face
as the awful narrative went on came a gray look which deepened and deepened in the morning light
till when the first red streak of the coming dawn shot up the flesh stood darkly out against the
hair we have arranged that one of us is to stay within call of the unhappy pair till we can meet
together and arrange about taking action of this i am sure the sun rises today on no more miserable
house in all the great round of its daily course end of chapter 21